Getting started: your first 3D game tutorial (#4403)
godotengine/godot-docs: getting_started/first_3d_game/08.score_and_replay.rst

Score and replay
================

In this part, we'll add the score, music playback, and the ability to restart
the game.

We have to keep track of the current score in a variable and display it on
screen using a minimal interface. We will use a text label to do that.

In the main scene, add a new *Control* node as a child of *Main* and name it
*UserInterface*. You will automatically be taken to the 2D screen, where you can
edit your User Interface (UI).

Add a *Label* node and rename it to *ScoreLabel*.

|image0|

In the *Inspector*, set the *Label*'s *Text* to a placeholder like "Score: 0".

|image1|

Also, the text is white by default, like our game's background. We need to
change its color to see it at runtime.

Scroll down to *Custom Colors* and click the black box next to *Font Color* to
tint the text.

|image2|

> Pick a dark tone to it contrasts well with the 3D scene.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pick a dark tone so it contrasts well with the 3D scene.
```

Creating a UI theme
-------------------

Once again, select the *UserInterface* node. In the *Inspector*, create a new
theme resource in *Theme -> Theme*.

|image5|

Click on it to open the theme editor In the bottom panel. It gives you a preview
of how all the built-in UI widgets will look with your theme resource.

|image6|

By default, a theme only has one property, the *Default Font*.

.. seealso::

    You can add more properties to the theme resource to design complex user
    interfaces, but that is beyond the scope of this series. To learn more about
    creating and editing themes, see :ref:`doc_gui_skinning`.

Click the *Default Font* property and create a new *DynamicFont*.

|image7|

Expand the *DynamicFont* by clicking on it and expand its *Font* section. There,
you will see an empty *Font Data* field.

|image8|

This one expects a font file like the ones you have on your computer. Two common
font file formats are TrueType Font (TTF) and OpenType Font (OTF).

In the *FileSystem* dock, Expand the ``fonts`` directory and click and drag the
``Montserrat-Medium.ttf`` file we included in the project onto the *Font Data*.
The text will reappear in the theme preview.

> The text's a bit small. Set the *Settings -> Size* to ``22`` pixels to increase

Reviewer: I’d find the full “The text is” slightly more legible, since there can be a confusion with the possessive, see line below.

> The text's a bit small. Set the *Settings -> Size* to ``22`` pixels to increase

Author: ```suggestion
The text is a bit small. Set the *Settings -> Size* to ``22`` pixels to increase
```

their ``squashed`` signal to know when that happens. However, as we instantiate
monsters from the code, we cannot do the connection in the editor.

Instead, we have to make the connection from the code every time we spawn a
monster.

Open the script ``Main.gd``. If it's still open, you can click on its name in
the script editor's left column.

|image10|

Alternatively, you can double-click the ``Main.gd`` file in the *FileSystem*
dock.

At the bottom of the ``_on_MobTimer_timeout()`` function, add the following
line.

::

   func _on_MobTimer_timeout():
       #...
       # We connect the mob to the score label to update the score upon squashing one.
       mob.connect("squashed", $UserInterface/ScoreLabel, "_on_Mob_squashed")

This line means that when the mob emits the ``squashed`` signal, the
*ScoreLabel* node will receive it and call the function ``_on_Mob_squashed()``.

Head back to the ``ScoreLabel.gd`` script to define the ``_on_Mob_squashed()``
callback function.

There, we increment the score and update the displayed text.

::

   func _on_Mob_squashed():
       score += 1
       text = "Score: %s" % score

> The second line uses the value of the' score' variable to replace the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second line uses the value of the ``score`` variable to replace the
```

Select the *UserInterface* and apply *Layout -> Full Rect* to it as well. The
*Retry* node should now span the whole viewport.

Let's change its color so it darkens the game area. Select *Retry* and in the
*Inspector*, set its *Color* to something both dark and transparent. To do so,
in the color picker, drag the *A* slider to the left. It controls the color's
alpha channel, that is to say, its opacity.

|image15|

Next, add a *Label* as a child of *Retry* and give it the *Text* "Press Enter to
retry."

|image16|

To move it and anchor it in the center of the screen, apply *Layout -> Center*
to it.

|image17|

Coding the retry option
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can now head to the code to show and hide the *Retry* node when the player
dies and plays again.

Open the script ``Main.gd``. First, we want to hide the overlay at the start of
the game. Add this line to the ``_ready()`` function.

::

   func _ready():
       #...
       $UserInterface/Retry.hide()

Then, when the player gets hit, we show the overlay.

::

   func _on_Player_hit():
       #...
       $UserInterface/Retry.show()

Finally, when the *Retry* node is visible, we need to listen to the player's

> input and restart the game if they press enter. To do this, we use the build-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input and restart the game if they press enter. To do this, we use the built-in
```
